
mammalsfarmed mink
While it's unlikely that people would become infected with bird flu viruses through contact with an infected wild, stray, feral, or domestic mammal, it is possibleespecially if there is prolonged and  exposure to an infected animal. This page provides information for different groups of people who might have direct contact with infected or potentially infected sick or dead animals, including animals that might have eaten or been exposed to bird flu-infected birds.
If your domestic animals (e.g., cats or dogs) go outside and could potentially eat or be exposed to sick or dead birds infected with bird flu viruses, or an environment contaminated with bird flu virus, they could become infected with bird flu. While it's unlikely that you would get sick with bird flu through direct contact with your infected pet, it is possible. For example, in 2016, the spread of bird flu from a cat to a person was  The person who was [2.29 MB, 4 pages] was a veterinarian who had mild flu symptoms after prolonged exposure to sick cats without using personal protective equipment.
If your pet is  compatible with bird flu virus infection and has been exposed to infected (sick or dead) wild birds/poultry, you should monitor your health for signs of fever or infection.
As a general precaution, people should avoid direct contact with wild birds and observe wild birds only from a distance, whenever possible. People should also avoid contact between their pets (e.g., pet birds, dogs and cats) with wild birds. Don't touch sick or dead birds, their feces or litter, or any surface or water source (e.g., ponds, waterers, buckets, pans, troughs) that might be contaminated with their saliva, feces, or any other bodily fluids without wearing personal protective equipment (PPE). More information about specific precautions to take for preventing the spread of bird flu viruses between animals and people is available at . Additional information about the appropriate PPE to wear is available at .
More Information



If you find a sick or dead bird, check with your state health department, state veterinary diagnostic lab, or state wildlife agency on their policy for collecting dead animals and testing sick or dead animals.
During outbreaks of bird flu in wild birds and/or poultry, people who have had direct contact with infected or potentially infected animals, including sick animals that might have eaten bird flu-infected birds, should .
Signs and Symptoms may include: Fever (Temperature of 100F [37.8C] or greater) or feeling feverish/chills*
*Fever may not always be present
Call your state/local health department immediately if you develop any of these signs or symptoms  to an infected or potentially infected animal. Discuss your potential exposure and ask about testing. If testing is recommended, isolate as much as possible until test results come back and/or you have recovered from your illness.
Additionally, close contacts (family members, etc.) of people who have been exposed to a person or animal with lab-confirmed bird flu viruses should also monitor their health for 10 days after their exposure for signs and symptoms of illness. If close contacts of people who have been exposed to H5 bird flu viruses develop signs and symptoms of illness, they should also contact their state health department.
Bird Flu Information for Specific Groups

Resources for the General Public








Resources for Public Health Professionals




 

