Recommendations for poultry workers and bird outbreak respondershunters poultry producerspoultry outbreak respondersUSDA's website .

Infected birds can shed avian influenza A viruses in their saliva, nasal secretions, and feces. Susceptible birds become infected when they have contact with the virus as it is shed by infected birds. They also can become infected through contact with surfaces that are contaminated with virus from infected birds.
Highly Pathogenic and Low Pathogenic Avian Influenza A VirusesAvian influenza A viruses are classified into the following two categories: low pathogenicity avian influenza (LPAI) A viruses, and highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) A viruses. pdf icon[2.55 MB, 64 Pages]external icon. HPAI and LPAI are defined and explained below:
Both HPAI and LPAI viruses can spread rapidly through poultry flocks. HPAI and LPAI designations do not refer to or correlate with the severity of illness in cases of human infection with these viruses; both LPAI and HPAI A viruses have caused mild to severe illness in infected humans. There are genetic and antigenic differences between the influenza A virus subtypes that typically infect only birds and those that can infect birds and people.
Avian Influenza   OIE   World Organisation for Animal HealthUSDA's APHIS webpageUSGS National Wildlife Health Center.
 
Domesticated birds (chickens, turkeys, ducks, etc.) may become infected with avian influenza A viruses through direct contact with infected waterfowl or other infected poultry, or through contact with surfaces that have been contaminated with the viruses.
Avian influenza outbreaks in domesticated birds are of concern for several reasons:
When avian influenza A(H5) or A(H7) virus outbreaks occur in poultry, depopulation (or culling, also called stamping out') of infected flocks is usually carried out. In addition, surveillance of flocks that are nearby or linked to the infected flock(s) and quarantine of exposed flocks with culling if disease is detected, are the preferred control and eradication methods. See  for more information about avian influenza A virus infections in U.S. poultry. More information about avian influenza in poultry in the United States is available through the external icon.

CDC, the external icon, the external icon, the external icon, and the external icon conduct routine surveillance to monitor influenza viruses for changes that may have implications for animal and public health. CDC and WHO surveillance efforts are focused on human health. FAO and OIE are concerned with issues affecting animals, food and agriculture.
 

 

