

1200x675
Twitter Sample Messages   English
Per CDC, H5 #birdflu virus infections in US wild birds/poultry pose a low risk to the public. People very rarely get sick with bird flu, but those with work or recreational exposures to infected birds/poultry should take precautions: 
If you work with poultry infected with H5 bird flu virus, you are at higher risk of getting sick w/ bird flu yourself. CDC recommends poultry workers take precautions, including proper use of personal protective equipment to minimize your exposure risk. 

CDC: las infecciones de influenza aviar reportadas en aves de corral y silvestres en EE. UU. presentan un riesgo bajo para el pblico. Es raro que las personas se enfermen, pero las que tengan ms exposicin a aves infectadas deberan tomar precauciones
Hay brotes actuales de influenza aviar en aves de corral y silvestres en los EE. UU. Si trabajas con aves infectadas, tienes un riesgo mayor de exposicin a la influenza aviar. Los CDC recomiendan que los trabajadores avcolas tomen precauciones:
1200x675
Twitter Sample Message
#DYK there are ongoing outbreaks of H5 bird flu in US birds? If you have backyard poultry, learn how to protect them and yourself against bird flu. While human infections are rare, CDC recommends precautions for people w/ exposure to infected birds: 

Did you know there are ongoing outbreaks of H5 bird flu in wild birds and poultry in the United States? CDC recommends people with exposure to infected birds take precautions to avoid bird flu virus infection, even though human infections are rare. If you have a backyard poultry flock, protect your poultry and yourself against bird flu.
1080x1080
More: 

Did you know there are ongoing outbreaks of H5 bird flu in wild birds and poultry in the United States? CDC recommends people in contact with infected birds  take precautions to avoid bird flu virus infection, even though human infections are rare. If you have a backyard poultry flock, protect your poultry and yourself against bird flu.

#FightFlu #PublicHealth
Avian Influenza Transmission Infographic 
pdf icon[531 KB, 2 Pages]
pdf icon[581 KB, 2 Pages]
What To Know About Bird Flu 
pdf icon[268 KB, 2 pages]
Emergence and Evolution of H5N1 bird flu 

 

