H5N1 Detections in USA
Wild Birds:  Widespread
Poultry Flocks: Sporadic outbreaks
Mammals:  Sporadic infections
People: 1 ‘case’ in U.S. after exposure to infected birds
Person-to-person spread: None
Current public health risk: Low

Spotlights				
					
													
								Mar 30. 2023
								Chile Reports First Case of H5N1
							
													
								Mar 17. 2023
								Technical Report: Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza A(H5N1) Viruses
							
													
								Mar 14. 2023
								Human and Animal Health Experts Meet in South America to Prepare for Bird Flu
							
													
								Mar 03. 2023
								Update on H5N1 Bird Flu in Cambodia
							
											
				
				
More Spotlights
	
		
			
							
			
								
					This webpage will be updated at 2 PM EST each Wednesday to reflect any new data posted in the previous week.				
			
		
			

Protective Actions for PeopleProtective actions around wild birdsAvoid direct contact with wild birds and observe them only from a distance, if possible. Learn more.What to do if you find a dead birdAvoid contact with wild or domestic birds that appear ill or have died and call to report sick or dead birds. Learn more.Preparing foodIt is safe to eat properly handled and cooked poultry in the United States. Learn more.Traveling to other countriesCDC does not currently recommend any travel restrictions related to bird flu to countries affected by bird flu in poultry or people. Learn more.If you have contact with infected birds and become sickLearn what to do if you have contact with infected birds and become sick. Learn more.Clinician, laboratorian or public health workerVisit CDC’s avian influenza (bird flu) information for health professional and laboratorians webpage for the latest guidance. Learn moreGet a seasonal flu vaccineSeasonal flu vaccination will not prevent infection with bird flu viruses, but can reduce the risk of getting sick with human and bird flu viruses at the same time. Learn more.
Related Links
Highlights in the History of Avian Influenza (Bird Flu) Timeline – 2020-2023
Avian Influenza Communication Resources
Avian Influenza: Information for Health Professionals and Laboratorians
USDA: Detections of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza
USDA: Defend the Flock Program
USDA: Distribution of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza in North America
Technical Report: Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza A(H5N1) Viruses (cdc.gov)



		
			
							
			
								
					This webpage will be updated at 2 PM EST each Wednesday to reflect any new data posted in the previous week.				
			
		
			

           Email Address
            
          
        
