This document provides guidance for follow-up and antiviral chemoprophylaxis of close contacts of cases of human infection with novel influenza A viruses associated with severe human disease or with the potential to cause severe human disease.
This interim guidance is based on expert opinion and currently available published and unpublished data for antiviral treatment and chemoprophylaxis of seasonal, pandemic, and novel influenza A virus infections. These recommendations are based on the following considerations:

Novel influenza A viruses have caused sporadic infections resulting in severe human disease and substantial mortality among detected cases to date.
Limited, non-sustained human-to-human transmission of some novel influenza A viruses associated with severe human disease likely occurred or cannot be excluded in some case clusters that have occurred worldwide.
Sufficient supplies of antiviral agents that are expected to be effective against novel influenza A viruses are available.

The public health goal of this interim guidance is to prevent further spread of novel influenza A viruses associated with severe human disease if there are infected persons in the United States. It is specific to a scenario where there are sporadic cases associated with infected domestic poultry or wild bird exposures, and there is concern for possible limited, non-sustained human-to-human virus transmission.
Definition of Close Contacts
Close contacts are defined as persons within approximately 6 feet (2 meters) or within the room or care area of a confirmed or probable novel influenza A case-patient for a prolonged period of time, or who had direct contact with infectious secretions while the case-patient was likely to be infectious (beginning 1 day prior to illness onset and continuing until resolution of illness). 2
In general, decisions to initiate antiviral chemoprophylaxis should be guided by the risk stratification described below,3 based on observational data for reported cases of human infections with avian influenza A(H7N9) and A(H5N1) viruses, and on data from seasonal influenza studies. The risk of infection following close contact with a confirmed or probable novel influenza A case-patient is higher for persons with prolonged, unprotected exposures (e.g., without use of respiratory and eye protection) than for close contacts (e.g., health care personnel) who were wearing recommended personal protective equipment. More information: Recommended Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) [2.9 MB, 3 pages] and Interim Guidance for Infection Control Within Healthcare Settings.



Highest-risk exposure groups (recognized risk of transmission)

Household or close family member contacts with unprotected, prolonged close contact to a confirmed or probable case.


Moderate-risk exposure groups (unknown risk of transmission)

Health care personnel with unprotected close contact with a confirmed or probable case or nonhousehold members with prolonged unprotected close contact with a confirmed or probable case outside of a healthcare facility.


Low-risk exposure groups (transmission unlikely)

Others who have had social contact of a short duration with a confirmed or probable case in a non-hospital setting (e.g., in a community or workplace environment)4.





Health care personnel with unprotected close contact to case-patients with novel influenza A virus infection may have higher risk exposures than others through caring for patients of greater illness severity and higher viral levels. Persons with prolonged unprotected exposures outside of a healthcare facility may have a higher risk of exposure than those with short duration of close contact with a mildly ill novel influenza case-patient. Persons with an unprotected exposure to novel influenza A virus associated with severe human disease in a laboratory setting may have a high-risk or moderate-risk exposure, and need to be evaluated case by case.
Follow-up of Close Contacts of a Novel Influenza A Case-Patient
Public health personnel should attempt to identify as soon as possible and monitor all close contacts of confirmed or probable cases of human infection with novel influenza A viruses associated with severe human disease for new illness. (Visit Avian Influenza A Virus Case Definitions.) Available data suggest that the estimated incubation period for human infection with avian influenza A(H5N1) and A(H7N9) viruses is generally 3 to 5 days, but has been reported to be 7-10 days [1-12]. Limited non-sustained person-to-person transmission of A(H7N9) virus could not be excluded in some family clusters [7]. Limited non-sustained person-to-person transmission of A(H5N1) virus has been reported in several countries following close, prolonged unprotected contact with a severely ill A(H5N1) patient, including in household and hospital settings [6, 10, 11].
Identified close contacts should be monitored daily for 10 days after the last known exposure to a confirmed or probable case. Measured temperature and presence of respiratory symptoms should be assessed daily during this period. Any close contacts of a confirmed or probable case with a measured temperature of ?38.0°C (?100.4°F) or any new respiratory symptoms (e.g., cough, sore throat, shortness of breath, difficulty breathing) should be referred for prompt medical evaluation and testing for novel influenza A virus infection. To facilitate investigation, and if resources are available, close contacts of cases under investigation (especially those with a high index of suspicion) also may be identified and monitored for fever and respiratory symptoms while the results of laboratory testing are pending.
Post-exposure Antiviral Chemoprophylaxis of Asymptomatic Close Contacts

Oral oseltamivir or inhaled zanamivir chemoprophylaxis should be provided to close contacts of a confirmed or probable novel influenza A case-patient according to risk of exposure.

In highest-risk exposure groups, chemoprophylaxis should be administered.
In moderate-risk exposure groups, chemoprophylaxis could be considered.
In low-risk exposure groups, chemoprophylaxis is not routinely recommended.


Decisions to initiate antiviral chemoprophylaxis for persons in moderate- and low-risk exposure groups should be based on clinical judgment, with consideration given to the type of exposure and to whether the close contact is at higher risk for complications from influenza (visit Influenza Antiviral Medications: Summary for Clinicians).
Administration of antiviral chemoprophylaxis should begin as soon as possible (within 48 hours) after the first exposure to the confirmed or probable case.
The treatment frequency dosing for oral oseltamivir or inhaled zanamivir (one dose twice daily) is recommended instead of the typical antiviral chemoprophylaxis regimen (once daily). For specific dosage recommendations for treatment by age group, please visit Recommended Dosage and Duration of Influenza Antiviral Medications for Treatment or Chemoprophylaxis and refer to the treatment dosing (twice daily) as provided for seasonal influenza.

This recommendation for twice daily antiviral chemoprophylaxis dosing frequency is based on limited data that support higher chemoprophylaxis dosing in animals for avian influenza A(H5N1) virus infection [13], and on the desire to reduce the potential for development of antiviral resistance while receiving once daily chemoprophylaxis [14-16].


Antiviral chemoprophylaxis with treatment frequency dosing (twice daily) of oral oseltamivir or inhaled zanamivir should be continued for 5 or 10 days. If the exposure was time-limited and not ongoing, the recommended duration is 5 days from the last known exposure. If the exposure is likely to be ongoing (e.g., household setting), a duration of 10 days is recommended because of the potential for prolonged infectiousness from the novel influenza A case-patient.
Oral oseltamivir is recommended for persons of any age including newborn infants; inhaled zanamivir for persons aged 7 years and older.5 Inhaled zanamivir is not recommended for persons with underlying airway disease (e.g., asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease). Physicians should consult the manufacturer’s package insert for dosing, limitations of populations studied, contraindications, and adverse effects.

 Top of Page
Antiviral Treatment of Symptomatic Close Contacts (Cases under Investigation)

Symptomatic close contacts with any illness symptoms should be promptly tested for novel influenza A virus infection (visit Interim Guidance for Specimen Collection, Processing, and Testing for Patients with Suspected Infection with Novel Influenza A Viruses Associated with Severe Disease in Humans) and simultaneously treated as soon as possible with a neuraminidase inhibitor medication (oral oseltamivir, inhaled zanamivir, or intravenous (IV) peramivir) or oral baloxavir if within 2 days of symptom onset. If >2 days from symptom onset has occurred, treatment with oral oseltamivir should be started as soon as possible. (Visit the Interim Guidance on the Use of Antiviral Medications for Treatment of Human Infections with Novel Influenza A Viruses Associated with Severe Human Disease.)
Symptomatic persons should be isolated at home except to seek medical care and advised to avoid contact with other persons until their illness is resolved.

New Symptoms after Use of an Antiviral Agent

If a close contact becomes symptomatic or has worsening of symptoms after or during use of an antiviral agent, contact with other persons should be minimized, appropriate infection prevention and control measures should be used in healthcare settings (visit Interim Guidance for Infection Control Within Healthcare Settings When Caring for Patients with Confirmed Cases, Probable Cases, and Cases Under Investigation for Infection with Novel Influenza A Viruses Associated with Severe Disease), and respiratory specimens should be collected for novel influenza A virus testing at the state health department as soon as possible.
If a close contact tests positive for an avian influenza A virus associated with severe disease in humans (e.g., A(H5N1), A(H5N6) or A(H7N9) virus) and had taken oseltamivir chemoprophylaxis for 3 or more days before becoming symptomatic [17], oseltamivir should be stopped as soon as treatment with inhaled zanamivir (twice daily) or oral baloxavir can be initiated. This is because some novel influenza A viruses may rapidly become oseltamivir-resistant (and potentially peramivir-resistant) and remain zanamivir-susceptible and baloxavir-susceptible.
Investigation for antiviral resistance should be initiated immediately (in conjunction with the CDC Influenza Division), and infection prevention and control measures recommended for patients with novel influenza A virus infection should be implemented. (Visit Interim Guidance for Infection Control Within Healthcare Settings When Caring for Confirmed Cases, Probable Cases, and Cases Under Investigation for Infection with Novel Influenza A Viruses Associated with Severe Disease.)
Questions regarding arranging testing for antiviral resistance, or regarding appropriate clinical management if antiviral resistance is a concern, should be directed to the CDC Influenza Division via the CDC Emergency Operations Center (770-488-7100).

CDC will provide updated information as it becomes available on the CDC website at the Avian Influenza Current Situation Summary and Avian Influenza: Information for Health Professionals and Laboratorians.
 Top of Page

Table. Follow-up and chemoprophylaxis recommendations according to the case definition category for human infection with novel influenza A viruses associated with severe disease. (Case Definitions for Investigations of Human Infection with Avian Influenza A Viruses in the United States)

Case category of Exposure

Definition

Management of Close Contacts1

Case category of Exposure

Confirmed Case

Definition

Avian influenza A virus infection in a person that is confirmed by CDC’s Influenza Division Laboratory or a CDC designated laboratory using methods mutually agreed upon by CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE).

Management of Close Contacts1

Monitor for fever and respiratory symptoms for 10 days after the last exposure to the confirmed case; Consider antiviral chemoprophylaxis based on risk of exposure2

Case category of Exposure

Suspected Case (also called Case under investigation)

Definition

A person meeting criteria for avian influenza A virus infection below and for whom confirmatory laboratory test results are unknown or pending.

Management of Close Contacts1


Case category of Exposure

Probable case

Definition

A person meeting criteria for avian influenza A virus infection below and for whom laboratory test results do not provide a sufficient level of detail to confirm HPAI A H5 virus infection.

Management of Close Contacts1

Monitor for fever and respiratory symptoms for 10 days after the last exposure to the probable case;

Consider antiviral chemoprophylaxis based on risk of exposure2

1 For specific dosage recommendations for chemoprophylaxis by age group, please visit https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/antivirals/antiviral-dosage.htm.

2 Among close contacts: (1) Highest-risk exposure groups (recognized risk of transmission): Household or close family member contacts of a confirmed or probable case. (2) Moderate-risk exposure groups (unknown risk of transmission): Health care personnel with unprotected contact with a confirmed or probable case. (3) Low-risk exposure groups (transmission unlikely): Others who have had social contact of a short duration with a confirmed or probable case in a non-hospital setting (e.g., in a community or workplace environment)3

