 
This document provides guidance to local, state, and federal public health authorities on monitoring of persons potentially exposed to avian influenza viruses during official United States Department of Agriculture Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) response activities in the United States.


As part of your work, you may have been around bird flu viruses. Infected birds shed bird flu viruses in their saliva, mucous and feces. Human infections with bird flu viruses can happen when enough virus gets into a person's eyes, nose or mouth, or is inhaled. This can happen when virus is in the air (in droplets or possibly dust) and a person breathes it in, or when a person touches something that has virus on it and then touches their mouth, eyes or nose. Rare human infections with some bird flu viruses have occurred most often after unprotected contact with infected birds or surfaces contaminated with these viruses. However, some infections have also been identified when direct contact was not known to have occurred. Human infections with bird flu viruses worldwide have resulted in a wide range of illness, from asymptomatic infection (no symptoms) to mild illness (eye infections, upper respiratory symptoms), to severe pneumonia resulting in death.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) believes the risk of infection with bird flu viruses is low. However, because human infections with these bid flu viruses are possible, all people participating in bird flu outbreak response efforts should be  after their last possible exposure to infected birds or potentially contaminated environments, even if exposure to the sick birds was minimal or if personal protective equipment (PPE) was worn appropriately. During your response efforts, please follow all instructions given to you by your safety officer. After your response effort has concluded, you (and your resident state/local health department) will be responsible for illness monitoring.
State and local health departments are helping with this monitoring effort and should contact you while you're observing your health. By following the instructions below, you can help ensure that you receive prompt medical evaluation, testing (if warranted), and appropriate treatment if you become ill with signs and symptoms that could be due to infection with bird flu viruses.
Thank you for your contribution to the bird flu domestic response effort.
Visit  or 
Call 1-800-CDC-INFO (1-800-232-4636); TTY: 888-232-6348
Bird flu virus infections in humans are of public health concern, not only because of the illness they may cause, but because of their pandemic potential. Some bird flu viruses have been associated with greater numbers of human infections and more serious illnesses in people and therefore may pose a higher public health risk.
Bird flu viruses of public health concern include:

 

