 [325 KB, 17 pages]
This document provides guidance to local, state, and federal public health authorities on monitoring of persons potentially exposed to avian influenza A viruses during official United States Department of Agriculture Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) response activities in the United States.
print solid iconPrint
 Viruses like these have caused rare, sporadic infections in people in other countries, resulting in human illness ranging from mild (e.g., eye infections, cough, sore throat) to severe (e.g., pneumonia, shortness of breath, difficulty breathing). These viruses have the potential to cause human illness in people who have been exposed to infected birds.
Infected birds shed bird flu viruses in their saliva, mucous and feces. Human infections with bird flu viruses are rare, but they can happen when virus gets into a person's eyes, nose, or mouth, or is inhaled. This can happen when virus is in the air (in droplets or possibly dust) and a person breathes it in, or possibly when a person touches something that has virus on it and then touches their mouth, eyes or nose. Most often these infections have occurred after unprotected contact with infected birds.
Because human infections with these bird flu viruses are possible, all people with direct or close exposure to infected ,  should be monitored for illness for 10 days after their last exposure. State and local health departments are helping to monitor people's health and you should contact your health department if you get any of the symptoms listed on this fact sheet during the 10 days after your last exposure. By following the instructions below, you can help ensure that you receive prompt medical evaluation, testing, and appropriate treatment if you become ill with signs and symptoms that could be due to bird flu.

You should observe your health daily even if you carefully followed all guidelines and instructions for properly putting on and taking off personal protective equipment (PPE) and maintaining biosecurity precautions.
Re-start your 10-day monitoring period from Day 1 if you are around infected birds or contaminated environments again.
Your local/state health department should contact you regarding your exposure. Please follow all additional instructions that are given to you regarding monitoring for symptoms. They may, for example, ask you to respond to a daily phone call, email, or text message with a report on your health status.


Visit  or 
Call  (); TTY: 
Bird flu virus infections in humans are of public health concern, not only because of the illness they may cause, but because of their pandemic potential if they were to change to spread easily from person-to-person. Bird flu virus infections can cause a wide range of illness, from mild to severe. Some bird flu viruses have been associated with greater numbers of human infections and more serious illnesses in people and therefore may pose a greater public health risk. 

 

